docs: add PHP deprecation guide and wire it into AGENTS.md (#23483)
Yoast/wordpress-seo: DEPRECATING.md

---
name: deprecate-php
description: "Deprecate PHP methods, classes, filters, and actions in the Yoast wordpress-seo repository following the official deprecation guide. Handles finding usages, adding _deprecated_function() calls, PHPDoc annotations, moving files to src/deprecated/, updating the DI container deprecated-classes list, and deprecating hooks with do_action_deprecated/apply_filters_deprecated."
---

# Deprecate PHP

Follow this process to deprecate a PHP method, class, filter, or action in Yoast SEO.

## Step 1 — Find usages

Before making any changes, locate all existing usages:

1. **Code:** Search the codebase for the method/class/hook name. Also search for the name as a string (it may be used as a hook callback that static analysis won't catch).
2. **Docs:** Search the developer docs for mentions; note any that need updating or a deprecation notice.

> 3. **Third parties:** Check [WPdirectory](https://wpdirectory.net/) and GitHub for external plugins/themes using the symbol. If an actively supported plugin depends on it, consider notifying the maintainer before the RC1 cut.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Third parties:** Check [Veloria (formerly WPDirectory)](https://https://veloria.dev/) and GitHub for external plugins/themes using the symbol. If an actively supported plugin depends on it, consider notifying the maintainer before the RC1 cut.
```

 * @codeCoverageIgnore
 *
 * @param string $name The name to format.
 *
 * @return string The formatted name.
 */
public function format_name( $name ) {
    _deprecated_function( __METHOD__, 'Yoast SEO 20.0', 'Formatter::format_name' );
    return YoastSEO()->helpers->formatter->format_name( $name );
}
```

## Deprecating a class

1. Add `_deprecated_function( __METHOD__, 'Yoast SEO X.Y' )` to `__construct` — this is the single point that fires the notice for any caller that instantiates the class. Child classes that call `parent::__construct()` inherit the notice automatically.
2. Add `@deprecated X.Y` and `@codeCoverageIgnore` to the **class-level PHPDoc block** and to `__construct`'s PHPDoc block.
3. Add `@deprecated X.Y` and `@codeCoverageIgnore` to the PHPDoc of every other public method for documentation purposes, but **do not** add a `_deprecated_function()` call to each one — the constructor notice is sufficient and adding it to every method produces redundant noise.
4. **Exception:** if an individual public method is also independently callable (e.g. called statically, or as a hook callback directly) without going through the constructor, deprecate it individually too.

> 5. Internal helper functions/methods that are only ever called by already-deprecated public API do **not** need a `_deprecated_function()` call — the public entry point already fires the notice. Add `@deprecated X.Y` and `@codeCoverageIgnore` to their PHPDoc for clarity.

Reviewer: I'd add a point that we can remove or shortcut the internal methods that are not used anymore (e.g. when the public method are changed to call the alternative method)
